
II DEC Original Documentation
---------------------------------
           		KI10 Central Processor Maintenance Manual (Oct 1973, A-MN-KI10-0-MAN1)

CHAPTER 3 OPERATION

This chapter describes the processor controls and indicators that are readily accessible to the
operator and discusses the normal operation of the processor, reader, punch, and console
teletypewriter. Some maintenance information is included, but descriptions of any controls and
indicators mounted behind the doors of the processor bays and the detailed discussion of
operation for maintenance purposes are in section 10.2.

3.1 CONTROL PANELS

Photographs of the various processor control panels are printed on foldouts in Appendix B. Most
of the controls and indicators used for normal operation of the processor and for program
debugging are located on the console operator panel and the small maintenance panel just above
it; these are shown together in Figure B-1. The panels at the tops of the bays contain only
indicators, most of which are for maintenance (Figures B-2 to B4).

In the upper half of the operator panel are four rows of indicators, and below them are three
rows of two-position keys and switches. Physically both are pushbuttons, but the keys are
momentary contact whereas the switches are alternate action. Relative to the internal logic, the
switches are actually flipflops that are controlled by the buttons but which in many cases can
also be "operated" by the program. A switch is on or represents a 1 when it is illuminated.
Buttons that actually trigger operating sequences in the processor are the operating keys, which
are located in the right half of the bottom row. Operating switches are those that supply
control levels for governing various processor operations; these include the buttons in the left
half of the bottom row (except SINGLE PULSER), the paging switches at the left end of the third
row, and the buttons at the left in the top two rows at the left end of the maintenance panel.
The remaining buttons are sense switches, groups that constitute switch registers, and various
other special keys and switches that supply information to the program or to specific hardware
functions, or perform special functions of various sorts separate from the normal processor
operating sequence.

The thirty-six numbered switches in the second row from the bottom on the operator panel and the
twenty-two numbered switches in the row above them are the data and address switches through
which the operator can supply words and addresses for the program and for use in conjunction
with the operating keys and switches. At the right end of each of these switch registers is a
pair of keys that clear or load all the switches in the register together. The load button sets
up the switches according to the contents of the corresponding bits of the memory indicators
(MI) in the fourth row. At the left end of the maintenance panel are switches to select the
device for readin mode and a set of sense switches, which can be interrogated by the program.

The center section of the maintenance panel contains a voltmeter and controls for margin
checking, and the right section contains speed controls for slowing down the program. Between
these is a counter that registers the total time processor power has been on (the counter reads
hours if the line frequency is 50 Hz, but at 60 Hz it counts six for every five hours). Below
the counter are four special buttons, two of which are locks that are used to prevent
inadvertent manipulation of the keys and switches while the processor is running: the console
data lock disables the data and sense switches; the console lock disables all other buttons
except those that are mechanical, which group comprises the four under the counter and the
readin device switches.

Power is supplied to the system by means of the switch at the right end in the group under the
counter. This switch is lit while power is on, but the power light in the upper right corner of
the operator panel is lit only when the system is actually in operation or is ready for
operation; after power turnon the light does not come on until power is stabilized in the
correct range. At the left of the margin check controls are three red lights that indicate an
overtemperature condition somewhere in the processor logic, a tripped circuit breaker, or a
cooling assembly door open. Whenever any of these lights goes on the Power Failure flag sets and
power automatically shuts down.

3.1.1 Indicators

When any indicator is lit the associated flipflop is 1 or the associated function is true. Some
indicators display useful information while the processor is running, but many change too
frequently and can be discussed only in terms of the information they display when the processor
is stopped. The program can stop the processor only at the completion of the HALT instruction;
the operator can stop it at the end of every instruction, in certain memory references, or
following every clock pulse (the last allows extremely slow speed operation with the clock
running slowly or each clock pulse triggered individually by the operator).

Of the large groups of lights on the operator panel, the right half of the second row displays
the contents of PC, the third row displays the instruction being executed or just completed, and
the fourth row is the memory indicators. The left third of the third row displays IR; in an IO
instruction the left three instruction lights are on, the remaining instruction lights and the
left accumulator light are the device code, and the remaining accumulator lights complete the
instruction code. The right half of the row displays the virtual address on the address bus, and
the I and index lights reflect the states of the corresponding bits of the memory buffer. Hence
the right two thirds of the row changes with every memory reference, and the I and index lights
actually display the indirect bit and the index register address only following an instruction
fetch or an indirect reference in an effective address calculation.

Above the memory indicators appear two pairs of words, PROGRAM DATA and MEMORY DATA. If the
triangular light beside the former pair is on, the indicators display a word supplied by a DATAO
PI; if any other data is displayed the light beside MEMORY DATA is on instead. While the
processor is running, the addresses used for memory reference are compared with the contents of
the address switches in a manner determined by the paging switches and the User Address Compare
Enable flag. Whenever the two addresses are equal and the comparison is enabled, the contents of
the addressed location are displayed in the memory indicators. However, once the program loads
the indicators, they can be changed only by the program until the operator turns on the MI
program disable switch, executes a key function that references memory, or presses the reset key
(see below).

The four sets of seven lights at the left display the state of the priority interrupt channels.
The PI ACTIVE lights indicate which channels are on. The IOB PI REQUEST lights indicate which
channels are receiving request signals over the in-out bus; the PI REQUEST lights indicate
channels on which the processor has accepted requests. Except in the case of a program-initiated
interrupt, a REQUEST light can go on only if the corresponding ACTIVE light is on. The PI IN
PROGRESS lights indicate channels on which interrupts are currently being held; the channel that
is actually being serviced is the lowest-numbered one whose light is on. When an IN PROGRESS
light goes on, the corresponding REQUEST goes off and cannot go on again until IN PROGRESS goes
off when the interrupt is dismissed. PI ON indicates the priority interrupt system is active, so
interrupts can be started (this corresponds to CONI PI, bit 28). PI OK 8 indicates that there is
no interrupt being held and no channel waiting for an interrupt; this signal is used by the real
time clock to discount interrupt time while timing user programs.

Note: If a REQUEST light stays on indefinitely with the associated IN PROGRESS light off and PC
is static, check the PI CYC light on the indicator panel at the top of the console. If it is on,
a faulty program has hung up the processor. Press RESET.

The four lights at the center of the top row indicate the processor mode. One and only one of
these lights can be on and they represent the combined states of the User and Public flags. The
rest of the top row contains the power light and the following control indicators.

RUN

The processor is in normal operation with one instruction following another (although the light
remains on at a stop in a memory refererce). When the light goes off, the processor stops.

STOP MAN

The operator has stopped the processor by pressing STOP or RESET.

STOP PROG

The processor has been stopped by a HALT instruction. At the completion of the instruction the
address lights display the jump address (the location from which the next instruction will be
taken if the operator presses the - continue key), and the AR lights at the top of bay 2 display
an address one greater than that of the location containing the instruction that caused the
halt.

STOP MEM

The processor has stopped at a memory reference. This can be due to satisfaction of an address
condition selected at the console, reference to a nonexistent memory location, or detection of a
parity error.

KEY MAINT

One of the following switches is on (this light is equivalent to CONI APR, bit 8): FM MANUAL,
MEM OVERLAP DIS, SINGLE PULSE, MARGIN ENABLE, SINGLE INST, STOP PAR. Any one of these switches
being on implies that the processor is being operated for maintenance purposes, and is not
running at maximum speed.

KEY PG FAIL

A key function has caused a page failure. No page fail trap is executed in response to a key-
induced failure; if the processor is running, it continues the program.

The remaining processor lights are on the indicator panels at the tops of the bays. No attempt
is made here to explain the meanings of these lights, as that is effectively the objective of
the next five chapters — the lights reflect the logic of the machine. The large groups of lights
on the panel at the top of bay 2 (Figure B-3) display the contents of the adder, the AR, BR and
MQ registers, and the selected location in fast memory. At the right of the registers are a
number of miscellaneous control signals, primarily enables for the shift counter, but also the
enables for the IR latches and signals associated with the fetching and completion of an
instruction. At the right end the upper four rows display the SC adder, its data inputs, and the
shift counter and floating exponent register. The bottom row displays the AR flags, where FXU is
Floating (exponent) Underflow and DCK is No Divide (divide check). FXU HOLD is a nonprogram flag
that plays a role in determining underflow conditions. At the end are the flipflops that inhibit
the clock and prolong its period.

The right halves of the top two rows of the bay 1 panel (Figure B-2) display the contents of the
AD and AR extensions. Below these are three general flags used by the hardware and the enables
for AD and ADX. The rest of the lights in the top four rows display all of the time state
flipflops, flags and special control levels for the processor cycles, traps, and special
sequences except those for in-out, priority interrupt, page fail and key functions. BYF6 in the
top row is the First Part Done flag; the TN lights at the right end of the fourth row are the
trap flags (TN 0 is Trap 2). The right half of the bottom row displays the physical address for
each memory reference and the type of memory request. At the left are the lights for the
associative memory. The AB 14-17 lights at the center are always either off or reflect the
states of address switches 14-17.

The lights in the top row of the panel on the console bay (bay 3, Figure B-4) display either the
contents of the in-out bus, the paper tape reader buffer, MB, or the information supplied by the
last DATO PAG, as selected by the 4-position switch in the right section of the maintenance
panel. The rest of the panel displays the user and executive base registers, and a multitude of
signals for memory control, fast memory control, the key logic, paging, priority interrupt, in -
out, the basic in-out devices (reader, punch, teletypewriter) and the processor flags. Note that
the TRAP ENABLE light at the center of the second row is the Page Enable flag, which also
enables overflow traps (DATAI PAG, bit 22). PAGE LAST MUUO PUB at the very center of the panel
is the Disable Bypass flag. The User IOT flag is in the middle of the third row, and COMP ADR
BRK INH near the left end of the bottom row is Address Failure Inhibit.

3.1.2 Operating Keys

The operating keys can be used whether RUN is on or off. If the processor is running when a key
is pressed, it simply pauses at an appropriate point in the program to perform a key cycle to
execute the function. These key functions are effectively of three types. The first three keys
on the left are for the initiating functions, read in, start, and continue: these functions
place the processor in operation under conditions determined primarily by the function itself.
The next two keys are for the terminating functions, stop and reset: if the processor is
running, these functions stop it. The last five keys are for the independent functions, execute,
examine, examine next, deposit, and deposit next. These functions have no inherent effect on
processor operation: if the processor is not running it simply performs a key cycle and stops;
if it is running, it pauses to perform a key cycle and continues the program. (However the data
deposited or the instruction executed may have an effect.) Moreover the independent functions
are affected by the setting of the paging switches, which determine the address space in which
the function is performed.

The logic responds to the keys in two stages. When a key is pressed or several are pressed
simultaneously, the logic latches them. From among the buttons latched, the processor then
accepts the request for the function that has priority; the priority order is the same as the
order of the keys from left to right on the panel except that reset has first priority. As soon
as a function request is accepted, the corresponding button lights up and remains lit until the
function is completed. If the processor is not already in operation, it performs the accepted
function immediately; otherwise it saves the function until it can be performed. While any
button is lit, however, no function request can be accepted; in other words, although the
processor will interrupt the program to perform a key function, it will not interrupt one key
function for another. It will however do one key latch while a key is lit and accept the highest
priority latched function once the current function is done. Provision is also made in the logic
so that the RESET key can be used to stop the processor no matter what.

READ IN

Clear all IO devices and all processor flags. Turn on RUN and EXEC MODE KERNEL (trapping and
paging will both be disabled as TRAP ENABLE at the top of the console bay will be off). Execute
DATAI D,0 where D is the device code specified by the readin device switches at the left end of
the maintenance panel (the rightmost device switch is for bit 9 of the instruction and thus
selects the least significant octal digit (which is always 0 or 4) in the device code). Then
execute a series of BLKI D,0 instructions until the left half of location 0 reaches zero. After
storing the last word in the block, fetch that word as an instruction from the location in which
it was stored as specified by PC. Since RUN has been set the processor begins normal operation
at the location containing the last word. (For information on the data format refer to the
System Reference Manual.)

Note that the key function lasts throughout the processing of the entire block. This means that
readin cannot be interrupted for another key function. Hence if it must be stopped (eg because
of a crumpled tape), press RESET.

START

Turn on RUN and EXEC MODE KERNEL, and begin normal operation by fetching the instruction at the
location specified by address switches 18-35. The memory subroutine for the instruction fetch
loads the address into PC for the program to continue. This function does not disturb the flags
or the IO equipment.

CONT

If STOP MEM is on begin normal operation at the point at which the processor is stopped in a
memory subroutine. Otherwise turn on RUN and begin normal operation by fetching an instruction
from the location specified by PC.

STOP

Turn off RUN so the processor stops with STOP MAN on. At the stop PC points to the location of
the instruction that will be fetched if CONT is pressed (this is the instruction that would have
been done next had the processor not stopped). The processor may stop in the middle of a two -
part instruction, but pressing CONT restarts the instruction without repeating any first-part
actions that would adversely affect the result.

RESET

Clear all IO devices, disable auto restart, high speed operation and margin programming, clear
the processor flags (lighting EXEC MODE KERNEL), turn on the triangular light beside MEMORY DATA
(turn off the light beside PROGRAM DATA), turn off RUN and stop the processor.

If this function is not performed within 10 ms (eg because READ IN is lit), the key triggers a
panic reset that produces all of the standard reset actions and also clears all but the
mechanical console keys and switches. If STOP ever fails to stop the processor, pressing this
key will, but not without destroying information. To save the processor state press SINGLE INST
and SINGLE PULSE simultaneously.

XCT

Execute the contents of the data switches as an instruction without incrementing PC, even if 4
skip condition is satisfied in the instruction. If PAGING USER is on and PAGING EXEC is off,
execute the instruction in user virtual address space; otherwise use executive address space. If
the instruction is an XCT or LUUO, the instruction called by it is also executed.

Note that an instruction executed from the console can alter the processor state like any
instruction in the program: it can halt the processor, can change PC by jumping, alter the
flags, or even cause a non-existent memory stop (but not a page fail trap, even if it turns on
the KEY PG FAIL light).

         NOTE

         The remaining key functions all reference memory. They can therefore light KEY PG FAIL
         and set such flags as Nonexistent Memory and Parity Error, and they all turn on the
         triangular light beside MEMORY DATA, turning off the light beside PROGRAM DATA.
         Performing one of these functions with the ADDRESS STOP switch on stops the processor
         in the memory subroutine (with STOP MEM on). These functions use an address supplied by
         the address switches, and the way that address is interpreted is determined by the
         paging switches. If both paging switches are off, the function uses a 22-bit absolute
         physical address supplied by address switches 14-35, and fast memory references are
         made to the block selected by the FM block switches at the left end of the maintenance
         panel. If either paging switch is set, the function uses a virtual address supplied by
         address switches 18-35 and the FM block switches have no effect (in other words the
         function has access to one of the virtual address spaces defined for a normal program).
         If PAGING EXEC is on, the function has access to executive address space; if PAGING
         EXEC is off and PAGING USER is on, the function has access to user address space.

EXAMINE THIS

Display the contents of the location specified by the paging and address switches in the memory
indicators.

EXAMINE NEXT

Add 1 to the address displayed in the address switches, and display the contents of the location
then specified by the paging and address switches in the memory indicators.

DEPOSIT

Deposit the contents of the data switches in the location specified by the paging and address
switches, and display the word deposited in the memory indicators.

DEPOSIT NEXT

Add 1 to the address displayed in the address switches, deposit the contents of the data
switches in the location then specified by the paging and address switches, and display the word
deposited in the memory indicators.

3.1.3 Operating Switches

Besides defining the address space for the independent key functions, the paging switches also
perform this service for address comparison and for the group of five switches just at the left
of the operating keys. Whenever the processor references memory or an accumulator, it may
compare the virtual address used with that specified by address switches 18-35 and may take some
action if the two are identical. There are a number of conditions that affect the comparison.
First, comparison can be made only for memory references and accumulator write references —
there is never a comparison for an index register reference or an accumulator read reference.
Given the proper type of reference, the comparison must be enabled. If PAGING EXEC is on and
PAGING USER is off, the comparison is enabled for executive address space; if PAGING EXEC is off
and PAGING USER is on, the comparison is enabled for user address space provided the program has
turned on USER ADR COMP (User Address Compare Enable flag) in the upper left corner of the
console indicator panel; if both paging switches are on, the comparison is enabled for executive
address space, provided USER ADR COMP is on (in other words with both switches on, PAGING USER
applies the flag condition to PAGING EXEC). In a reference of the correct type with the
comparison enabled, if the virtual address on the address bus is identical to the address in
switches 18-35, the processor displays the contents of the addressed location or accumulator in
the memory indicators (unless the light beside PROGRAM DATA is on).

Except in an AC reference, the same situation that causes the word display can also be made to
stop the processor or produce an address failure, depending upon the purpose for which the
reference is made as selected by the three address condition switches. FETCH INST selects the
condition that access is for retrieval of an instruction, including an instruction executed by
an XCT, a user LUUO or a dispatch interrupt, but not a trap or standard interrupt instruction,
nor one executed by an executive LUUO. FETCH DATA selects read-only access for retrieval of an
operand or an address word in an effective address calculation, but not the PC word in an MUT°.
WRITE selects access for writing, including read-modify-write, but not writing done by an MUM or
executive LUUO. Whenever a memory reference satisfies both the comparison condition and any
selected address condition, the processor performs the action selected by the other two
switches. ADDRESS STOP halts the processor with STOP MEM on and PC pointing to the instruction
that was being performed (running with ADDRESS STOP on slows down the processor). ADDRESS BREAK
causes an address failure except in an instruction performed while COMP ADR BRK INH is on.
ADDRESS STOP also stops any examine or deposit function in the memory subroutine.

Conditions associated with the comparison are displayed by the COMP lights in the middle of the
bay 3 indicator panel. From left to right these indicate an accumulator write reference, a
memory read reference, equal addresses in a synchronous reference (an operand reference, but
limited to the first in a double operand) and equal addresses in an asynchronous reference (an
instruction fetch or the second in a double operand).

The description of each switch relates the action it produces while it is on.

SINGLE INST

Whenever the processor is placed in operation, clear RUN so that it stops at the end of the
first instruction. Hence the operator can step through a program one instruction at a time,
pressing START for the first one and CONT for subsequent ones. Each time the processor stops,
the lights display the same information as when STOP is pressed. Note that read in cannot be
done in single instruction mode, as the function' extends over many instructions and there is
thus no way to continue.

APR CLK FLAG (Clock flag) on the console indicator panel is held off to prevent clock interrupts
while SINGLE INST is on. Otherwise interrupts would occur at a faster rate than the
instructions.

         CAUTION

         It is not generally worthwhile to attempt to use the interrupt system in single
         instruction mode except with the slowest start-stop devices, such as reader, punch and
         teletypewriter. In any event an interrupt hangs up the processor, and the
         operator must dispose of it manually before single instruction operation can continue.

SINGLE INST  will not stop the processor if a hangup prevents it from getting to the end of
an instruction. Use STOP, RESET, or SINGLE PULSE.

SINGLE PULSE

Inhibit the clock so that a single clock pulse is generated each time SINGLE PULSER is pressed.
If the processor is not already in operation, an operating key must be pressed before SINGLE
PULSER can be used. If the processor is running, it converts to single pulse operation at the
beginning of the instruction cycle; hence the clock will not stop if the processor does not
reach the instruction cycle, say because it is hung up in a multiply or divide sequence. To
force the processor into single pulse operation regardless of its position in the operating
sequence, turn on both SINGLE INST and SINGLE PULSE; this stops the processor without destroying
information, as would occur if RESET were pressed.

STOP PAR

Stop with STOP MEM on at the end of any memory reference in which even parity is detected in a
word read. A parity stop is indicated by the following: PAR ERR FLAG (Parity Error flag) is on
in the bottom row on the bay 3 indicator panel; and among the PAR lights in the third row from
the bottom, ERR is on, IGN (ignore parity) is off, and BIT displays the parity bit for the word
read.

If IGN is on (it displays a signal from the memory), parity errors are not detected and no stop
can occur. Running with STOP PAR on slows down the processor.

STOP NXM

Stop with STOP MEM on if a memory reference is attempted but the memory does not respond within
100 ps. This type of stop is indicated by FLAGS NXM (Nonexistent Memory flag) being on in the
bottom row on the bay 3 indicator panel.

REPEAT

If SINGLE PULSE is on and the processor is placed in operation, slow down the clock so that the
processor runs at a clock rate determined by the speed controls at the right end of the
maintenance panel. If the processor is not already running, it can be placed in single-pulse
repeat operation by pressing an operating key and then pressing SINGLE PULSER. If the processor
is running and the switches are turned on in the order REPEAT/SINGLE PULSE, then it goes into
single pulse operation automatically at the beginning of the instruction cycle. If the processor
is running with REPEAT off, it stops at the beginning of the instruction cycle when SINGLE PULSE
is turned on; to restart it, turn on REPEAT and then press SINGLE PULSER twice. In any event
repetition ceases (and the light in the SINGLE PULSER button goes off) whenever the processor
gets to a point where the clock would have stopped anyway had SINGLE PULSE not been on. To
restart, simply press SINGLE PULSER. The lamp in the SINGLE PULSER button goes off at each clock
pulse and turns back on each time the clock is retriggered; hence the button glows with an
intensity that is relative to the clock duty cycle (eg for a given speed, the light will be
dimmer for a program with many memory references). When either REPEAT or SINGLE PULSE is turned
off, operation terminates after one more clock.

If SINGLE PULSE is off and any operating key is pressed, then every time the repeat delay can be
retriggered, wait a period of time determined by the setting of the speed control and repeat the
given key function. The point at which the processor can restart the repeat delay depends upon
the type of key function being repeated as follows.

         For an initiating function the delay starts when the processor stops with RUN off. This
         is either when the program gives a HALT instruction (STOP PROG) or following the first
         instruction if SINGLE INST is on.

         For an independent function the delay starts every time the function is done whether
         RUN is on or off.

         A terminating function stops the processor and the delay starts every time the function
         is repeated. Reset is generally used only to provide a chain of reset pulses
         on the 10 bus, and stop is used to troubleshoot the clock.

In any case continue to repeat the function until REPEAT is turned off. (The function is often
repeated once more, but this is noticeable only with very long repeat delays.)

The speed control includes a six-position switch that selects the delay range and a
potentiometer for fine adjustment within the range. Delay ranges are as follows.

                                Position	Range

	                                 1	    200 ns to 2 us
	                                 2	    2 us to 20 us
	                                 3	    20 us to 500 us
	                                 4      500 us to 6 ms
	                                 5	    6 ms to 160 ms
	                                 6      160 ms to 4 seconds

MI PROG DIS

Turn on the triangular light beside MEMORY DATA (turn off the light beside PROGRAM DATA) and
inhibit the program from loading any switches or displaying any information in the memory
indicators. The indicators will thus continually display the contents of locations selected from
the console.

MEM OVERLAP DIS

Prevent memory control from overlapping cycles on the memory bus. (This has no effect on
pipelining within memory control, such as overlapping the page checking of consecutive memory
subroutines.)

MARGIN ENABLE

Enable maintenance operation, including writing with even parity in memory and checking speed or
voltage margins. Maintenance actions attempted by the program are indicated by the last four
lights on the left end of the second row from the bottom on the bay 3 indicator panel. With
maintenance operation enabled, writing with even parity and checking speed margins are otherwise
entirely under program control. Voltage margins may be checked by the program or the operator
(for information on the margin select and manual margin address switches, refer to section
10.2).

FM MANUAL

All fast memory references for any purpose (index register, accumulator, memory) and under any
conditions are made to the fast memory block selected by the FM block switches. When FM MANUAL
is off, the block switches control fast memory references only in examine and deposit type key
functions with both paging switches off (ie with the function using physical addressing).
Turning on FM MANUAL overrides all other conditions so that all fast memory references are
controlled by the block switches.

3.1.4 Panel Maintenance

A panel indicator is worthless if the bulb is burned out. Before attempting to use the
information presented by the panels, press the LAMP TEST button below the counter on the
maintenance panel; this turns on all of the lamps so any that are burned out can easily be
detected. To replace a lamp in a button, pull out the button cap. The bulb will come with the
cap, so remove it, put a new one in the cap, and push the cap back into the panel.

        CAUTION

        The lamp test checks not only the bulbs but also indicator driver transistors and
        indicator cables. Hence after changing a bulb always repeat the test. If the replacement
        bulb will not light, the problem is probably more serious and requires more significant
        corrective maintenance.

Replacing a bulb for an indicator requires removal of the panel. To remove the operator
panel on early units, place your hands at the bottom corners and press in on the flush catches
that are underneath the ends of the panel. On later units, remove the panel by grasping. the
small black latches on either side; then remove the inner aluminum lamp shield by lifting it
out. The panel will snap free and can be pulled away. Pull out the bad bulb and insert a fresh
one, but exercise some care in doing this — the bulb has a pair of pins that must be inserted in
the socket, and shorting the terminals will burn out a transistor. After replacing the bad
bulbs, snap the panel back in place.

The indicator panels are hinged at the bottom. Grasp the panel at the top and pull down. It is
unnecessary to return to the console to find the bad bulb, as each bay has its own lamp test
button, located at the left of the lights behind the panel.

On the maintenance panel the only lamps not in buttons are those for the failure indicators. To
remove the panel, first remove the four switch knobs, each of which is held to its shaft by a
pair of Allen set screws. The panel is held in place by Velcro strips at the ends and can be
removed simply by pulling it out. Since handling the maintenance panel is somewhat of a chore,
it is probably best to replace all three bulbs whenever one bums out. Press the panel back in
place, then put on the knobs oriented so that the set screws are against the flats of the
shafts. Tighten the screws. lightly, rock each switch to make sure it is oriented properly, and
then tighten the screws thoroughly.

3.2 CONSOLE IN-OUT EQUIPMENT

The console teletypewriter is generally on a stand by the console. The reader and punch are
located in a drawer above the maintenance panel, but the face of the reader is available on the
front of the drawer, and at its right are a slot for removing tape from the punch and a pair of
rocker switches for feeding tape through reader or punch. Indicators for all three devices are
on the panel at the top of the console.

The ASCII code used with all console teletypewriters and generally used for alphanumeric data on
paper tape is shown on page A21. The main part of the diagram shows the configuration of bits 1-
5 or channels 1-5 for the various characters in four sets, where a dot represents a 1 or a hole
(the orientation of the tape is indicated by the little circles, which represent feed holes). At
the left end is the configuration for channels 6 and 7 for the four sets of characters. Channel
8 (which is not shown) is ordinarily used for parity. For the standard even parity of the
teletypewriter, the eighth bit is 1 for the characters printed on the dark background.

3.2.1 Reader

The contents of the reader buffer can be displayed in the top row of lights on the indicator
panel by setting the IND SELECT switch on the maintenance panel to PTR. The remaining indicators
for the reader are the PTR lights at the middle of the bottom row and near the left end of the
second row.

Tapes for the reader must be unoiled and opaque. To load the reader, place the fanfold tape
stack vertically in the bin at the right, oriented so that the front end of the tape is nearer
the read head and the feed holes are away from you. Lift the gate, take three or four folds of
tape from the bin, and slip the tape into the reader from the front. Carefully line up the feed
holes with the sprocket teeth to avoid damaging the tape, and close the gate. Make sure that the
part of the tape in the left bin is placed to correspond to the folds, otherwise it will not
stack properly. If the program requires that the Tape flag be set and it is not, briefly press
the feed switch at the right; setting the flag. also sets Done to signal the program that the
tape is loaded. After the program has finished reading the tape, run out the remaining trailer
by pressing the feed switch.

3.2.2 Punch

The punch is behind the reader in the console drawer. Fanfold tape is fed from a box at the rear
of the drawer. After it is punched, the tape moves into a storage bin from which the operator
may remove it through the slot on the front. Pushing the feed switch beside the slot clears the
punch buffer and punches blank tape as long as it is held in. Busy being set prevents the switch
from clearing the buffer, so pressing it cannot interfere with program punching.

To load tape, first empty the chad box behind the punch. Then tear off the top of a box of
fanfold tape (the top has a single flap; the bottom of the box has a small flap in the center as
well as the flap that extends the full length of the box). Set the box in the frame at the back
and thread the tape through the punch mechanism. The arrows on the tape should be underneath and
should point in the direction of tape motion. If they are on top, turn the box around. If they
point in the opposite direction, the box was opened at the wrong end; remove the box, seal up
the bottom, open the top, and thread the tape correctly.

To facilitate loading, tear or cut the end of the tape diagonally. Thread the tape under the
out-of-tape plate, over the rear guide plate, and through the punch die block; open the front
guide plate (over the sprocket wheel), push the - tape beyond the sprocket wheel, and close the
front guide plate. Press the feed switch long enough to punch about a foot and a half of leader.
Make sure the tape is feeding and folding properly in the storage bin.

To remove a length of perforated tape from the bin, first press the feed switch long enough to
provide an adequate trailer at the end of the tape (and also leader at the beginning of the next
length of tape). Remove the tape from the bin and tear it off at a fold within the area in which
only feed holes are punched. Make sure that the tape left in the bin is stacked to correspond to
the folds; otherwise, it will not stack properly as it is being punched. After removal, turn the
tape stack over so the beginning of the tape is on top, and label it with name, date, and other
appropriate information.

Indicators for the punch are the PTP lights near the middle of the bottom two rows. The numbered
lights display the last line punched.

3.2.3 Teletypewriter

Connections for the console teletypewriter are at the vertical panel behind the door below the
console table (Figure 3-1). In the upper half of this panel are two rotary switches that select
the input and output speed, a toggle switch that selects the signal type, and a pair of sockets
for the signal cable. The console teletypewriter is usually an LT35A Teletype (KSR), for which
both rotary switches are set to 110, the toggle is set to CURRENT, and the signal cable is
plugged into the upper socket. (For a Model 37 the speed would be 150, the toggle would be set
to EIA, and the cable would be plugged into the lower socket.) In the lower half of the panel
are switched and unswitched convenience outlets for the teletypewriter, scopes, and other
equipment used at the console.

The teletypewriter is actually two independent devices, keyboard and printer, which can be
operated simultaneously. Power must be turned on by the operator. The switch is beside the
keyboard, and has an unmarked third position (opposite ON), which turns on power but with the
machine off line so it can be used like a typewriter. The keyboard resembles that of a standard
typewriter. Codes for printable characters on the upper parts of the keytops are transmitted by
using the shift key; most control codes require use of the control key. The line feed spaces the
paper vertically at six lines to the inch, and must be combined with a return to start a new
line. In line with the space bar are four red buttons, the left one of which is not connected.
The local line feed and return keys affect the printer directly and do not transmit codes.
Pressing REPT and striking any character key (with or without the shift key on) causes repeated
transmission of the corresponding code so long as the repeat button is held down.

Indicators for the teletypewriter are the TTI, TTO and TTY lights in the right half of the
bottom two rows. The numbered TTI lights display the last character typed in from the keyboard.

Procedures for loading paper and changing the ribbon are given below. For further information
refer to Typing Unit section 574-220-100 in Teletype Bulletin 281B, Vol. 1 (Technical Manual:
Model 35 Keyboard Send-Receive ( KSR) and Receive-Only (RO) Teletypewriter Sets), which is
supplied with the machine.

Paper. The unit has a sprocket feed and uses 8-1/2 X 11 fanfold form paper. Printed forms can be
torn off against the edge of the glass window in front of the platen. To replace the paper,
first remove the upper cover by pressing the cover release buttons on the sides. To free the
remaining old paper for removal, lift the paper guides by pushing the lever marked PUSH at the
right of the platen. To load new paper, insert it through the slot in the cover and over the
plate behind, the platen, lining up the holes at the edges of the paper with the sprockets, and
press the local line feed to draw the paper in under the platen.

Figure 3-1 Console Teletypewriter Panel

Ribbon. Replace the ribbon whenever it becomes worn or frayed or when the printing becomes too
light. Disengage the old ribbon from the ribbon guides on either side of the type block, and
remove the reels by lifting the spring clips on the reel spindles and pulling the reels off (the
ribbon feed mechanism is called out in Figure 4 in the reference mentioned above). Remove the
old tape from one of the reels and replace the empty reel on one side of the machine; install a
new reel on the other side. Push down both reel spindle spring clips to secure the reels. Unwind
the fresh ribbon from the inside of the supply reel, over the guide roller, through the two
guides on either side of the type block, out around the other guide roller, and back onto the
inside of the takeup reel. Engage the hook on the end of the ribbon over the point of the arrow
in the hub. Wind a few turns of the ribbon and make sure that the reversing eyelet has been
wound onto the spool. Make sure the ribbon is seated properly and feeds correctly in operation.

